# `fud`: The Calyx Driver

Working with Calyx involves a lot of command-line tools. For example, an
incomplete yet daunting list of CLI tools used by Calyx is:

- All the Calyx [frontends][].
- Calyx compiler and its various command line tools
- Verilator, the Verilog simulation framework used to test Calyx-generated designs.
- Waveform viewers to see the results of simulation

`fud` aims to provide a simple interface for using these toolchains and executing them in a pipeline.
The source for fud is [here](https://github.com/calyxir/calyx/tree/master/fud).


## Installation
> Fud requires Python 3.9 or higher to work correctly.

`fud` currently has a dependency on [calyx-py](builder/calyx-py.md), which you need to install first.

You need [Flit](https://flit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) to install `fud`. Install it with `pip3 install flit`.

You can then install `fud` with

```bash
cd fud && flit install
```
(If using this method to install `fud`, `pip3` should be version >= 20)

If you are working on `fud` itself, you can install it with a symlink with:
```bash
cd fud && flit install --symlink
```

You can also install `fud` with

```bash
flit build
pip3 install dist/fud-0.3.0-py3-none-any.whl
```

Finally, point `fud` to the root of the repository:
```
fud config global.root <full path to Calyx repository>
```

## Configuration

Fud uses a global configuration file to locate tool paths and default values.
To view the configuration, use `fud c` or `fud config`.

**Check.**
Fud can automatically check if your configuration is valid and can help you set
certain variables. Perform this check with:
```bash
fud check
```

**Viewing keys.**
To view the current value of a key, use `fud config key`. For example, the
following shows the path to the Calyx compiler.
```bash
fud config stages.calyx.exec
```

**Updating keys.**
Keys can be updated using `fud config key value`.
For example, the following command updates the path to the Calyx compiler.
```bash
fud config stages.calyx.exec ./target/debug/calyx
```

## Adding Backends

`fud` wraps both frontends and backends for Calyx.
For a useful `fud` installation, you need to configure the Verilator
backend and accompanying tools.

### Verilator
We use the open source [Verilator][] tool to simulate Verilog programs
generated by the Calyx compiler.
Install Verilator by [following the official instructions](https://www.veripool.org/projects/verilator/wiki/Installing).
On macOS, you can use `brew install verilator` or, otherwise, compile from source:

    git clone https://github.com/verilator/verilator
    cd verilator
    git pull
    git checkout master
    autoconf
    ./configure
    make
    sudo make install

Run `fud check` to make sure you have the right version. We currently require >=v5.002 of Verilator with fud.

By default, `fud` will use the `verilator` executable to run Verilator.
To use a different binary, configure the path by:
```
fud config stages.verilog.exec <binary>
```

**Vcdump.**
Vcdump is a tool for converting `vcd` (Value Change Dump) files to JSON for
easier analysis with the command line.

Install it with:
```bash
cargo install vcdump
```

### Icarus Verilog
`fud` also supports [Icarus Verilog][icarus] as a simulation backend.
Since Icarus Verilog interprets programs, it can often be faster than
`verilator`.
First [install Icarus Verilog][icarus-install] and ensure that `iverilog` and
`vvp` are on your path.
Next, register the `icarus-verilog` external stage with `fud`:

```
fud register icarus-verilog -p fud/icarus/icarus.py
```

To test the simulation backend, run:
```
fud e --to dat examples/tutorial/language-tutorial-iterate.futil -s verilog.data examples/tutorial/data.json --through icarus-verilog
```

Registering this stage will define multiple paths in the fud transformation
graph between `futil` and the `vcd` and `dat` stages.
If you'd like `fud` to default to `verilog` stage, give it a [high
priority](./multiple-paths.md#using-stage-priority):
```
fud c stages.verilog.priority 1
```


## Dahlia Frontend

In order to use the Dahlia frontend with Fud, first [install
Dahlia](../../frontends/dahlia.md).
Once Dahlia is compiled, point `fud` to the Dahlia compiler binary:
```bash
fud config stages.dahlia.exec <full path to dahlia repo>/fuse
```

## Python frontends (Systolic array, NTT, MrXL, TVM Relay)
You need [flit][] to install our Python frontends.
```
pip3 install flit
```

Our Python [frontends](../../frontends) use a Calyx ast library written in Python. Install with:
```
cd calyx-py && flit install -s
```

Frontend specific instructions:
 - [Systolic array](../../frontends/systolic-array.md): Nothing else needed.
 - [NTT](../../frontends/ntt.md):
   - Install dependencies: `pip3 install prettytable`
   - Install external `fud` stage: `fud register ntt -p frontends/ntt-pipeline/fud/ntt.py`
 - [MrXL](../../frontends/mrxl.md):
   - Install `mrxl` binary: `cd frontends/mrxl && flit install -s`
   - Install `mrxl` [external stage][] for `fud`: `fud register mrxl -p frontends/mrxl/fud/mrxl.py`
 - [TVM Relay](../../frontends/tvm-relay.md): See instructions.


## Adding Synthesis Backends

`fud` supports wraps the Vivado (`synth-verilog`) and Vivado HLS (`vivado-hls`)
tools to generate area and resource estimates for Calyx designs.
See [the instructions](./xilinx.md) to configure them.

## Working with Stages

Fud is structured as a sequence of stages that transform inputs of one form
to outputs.

**Stages.**
`fud` transforms a file in one stage into a file in a later stage.
The `--from` and `--to` options specify the input and output stages to the
`fud exec` subcommand.
Use `fud info` to view all possible stages.

**Guessing stages.**
`fud` will try to guess the starting stage by looking at the extension of the
input file and output file (if specified using the `-o` flag).
If it fails to guess correctly or doesn't know about the extension, you can
manually set the stages using `--to` and `--from`.

## Profiling

Fud provides some very basic profiling tools through the use of the `--dump_prof` (or `-pr`) flag.
You can get overall stage durations for a `fud` run by simply using `-pr`.
For example,

```bash
  fud e examples/dahlia/dot-product.fuse --to dat \
  -s verilog.data examples/dahlia/dot-product.fuse.data \
  -pr
```

will output:

```
stage                           elapsed time (s)
dahlia                          1.231
futil                           0.029
verilog                         4.915
```

If you want time elapsed for each step in a stage, you can also provide one or more stages after the flag.
For example,

```bash
  fud e examples/dahlia/dot-product.fuse --to dat \
  -s verilog.data examples/dahlia/dot-product.fuse.data \
  -pr verilog
```

will output:

```
verilog                         elapsed time (s)
mktmp                           0.0
json_to_dat                     0.004
compile_with_verilator          5.584
simulate                        0.161
output_json                     0.003
cleanup                         0.003
```

If you want time elapsed for a single step, you can specify the given step, e.g.

```bash
  fud e examples/dahlia/dot-product.fuse --to dat \
  -s verilog.data examples/dahlia/dot-product.fuse.data \
  -pr verilog.simulate
```

will output:

```
verilog                         elapsed time (s)
simulate                        0.161
```

Lastly, the `-csv` flag will provide the profiling information in CSV format.

[frontends]: ../../frontends/index.md
[calyx-py]: ./calyx-py.md
[flit]: https://flit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
[verilator]: https://www.veripool.org/wiki/verilator
[external stage]: ./external.md
[icarus]: http://iverilog.icarus.com/
[icarus-install]: https://iverilog.fandom.com/wiki/Installation_Guide
